---
Done: true
"date:": 
tags: []
tipe: grant
---
Examining Coral Resilience in the Field and Laboratory: Impacts of Previous Environmental Changes on Temperature Stress Responses

Examiner la résilience des coraux sur le terrain et en laboratoire : impacts des changements environnementaux précédents sur les réponses au stress thermique
# Abstract 
Coral reefs are in a state of growing decline due to the pressures they endure from anthropogenic activities. Their decline shows no signs of slowing down, and with them, the vast biodiversity they host, which represents a third of the entire ocean's biodiversity. Countless efforts on this topic have arisen over the last decades in the form of various initiatives such as reef conservation, restoration, and raising awareness among populations that rely on them. However, without a proper understanding of their biological response to climate change, it is challenging to implement effective and clear strategies to assist these ecosystems as much as possible.

Corals are cnidarians that have an obligate symbiotic relationship with dinoflagellates from the genus Symbiodinium. This symbiosis is key to their ecological success but also makes them highly sensitive to environmental stressors. The algae provide over 90% of the energy requirements through photosynthesis to the coral, while the coral provides nutrients as well as protection from grazers and a stable position in the water column for the algae. However, when exposed to environmental stress, this symbiosis is disrupted, leading to the expulsion of the algae from the host. This phenomenon is known as "coral bleaching," as the coral turns white due to the absence of Symbiodiniaceae within its tissues, which give the animals their various colors. However, not all corals are equally sensitive to environmental stress. Some species have developed different adaptations to resist these stressors. Among these adaptations, we can consider symbiont shuffling (where certain Symbiodiniaceae are better at handling stress than others), changes in feeding strategies (from autotrophic to heterotrophic and vice versa), or changes in gene expression. While the first two have been extensively studied, research on gene expression, especially epigenetic mechanisms of the host, is still in its early stages. Epigenetics refers to mechanisms that influence phenotypic variation through genotype-environment interactions without involving genetic mutations. Compared to genetic adaptation, epigenetic mechanisms provide a quicker response that can act as a buffer against climate change. Additionally, these epigenetic adaptations might be transgenerational in some coral species, opening new avenues for coral conservation and restoration in the face of climate change. Understanding the dynamics of epigenetic mechanisms would greatly enhance our understanding of coral fate in response to climate change.

One of the most well-documented epigenetic mechanisms is DNA methylation. DNA methylation involves methylating CpG dinucleotides along the DNA, which can alter the expression of targeted genes. One aspect influenced by DNA methylation is the transcriptome. Increased gene-body methylation is associated with reduced transcriptional variability.

The coral microbiome also plays a significant role in coral responses to environmental changes. The coral microbiome consists of a diverse range of organisms, including bacteria, fungi, viruses, and Symbiodiniaceae. A flexible microbiome is thought to enhance adaptability to stress. These microbial communities also impact the host's epigenetic mechanisms, and vice versa.

Panama presents a unique environment for studying environmental change. The country's Pacific Ocean is divided into two main zones: the Gulf of Chiriquí and the Gulf of Panama. Between December and mid-April, the Gulf of Panama experiences an upwelling phenomenon driven by the wind. This upwelling induces a rapid temperature drop and increased nutrient levels, while the Gulf of Chiriquí remains unaffected due to orographic blocking. Corals from the species _Pocillopora meandrina_ and _Pocillopora verrucosa_ inhabit both areas, specifically on the coast of Coiba Island in the Gulf of Chiriquí and the Las Perlas Islands in the Gulf of Panama. Although they belong to the same species, the corals in Las Perlas have adapted to this constant environmental variability.

The project's objectives are as follows: to observe differences in gene expression and the microbiome of both _Pocillopora meandrina_ and _Pocillopora verrucosa_ corals from the two zones (Las Perlas and Coiba) (WP1); to measure the effects of short-term environmental variations (1 year) on gene expression , the microbiome, and coral morphology by doing a cross-transplantation between the 2 zones (WP2); and finally, to determine whether this adaptation to environmental variations enhances their resilience to heat and cold stress, both following short-term (1 year) and long-term (multiple years) environmental changes.

This project aims to provide crucial insights into mechanisms of adaptation to environmental change and offer potential new ideas to enhance coral restoration, better equipping reefs to withstand the increasing challenges of climate change.

# The real abstact 

Coral reefs face escalating decline due to human activities, jeopardizing their rich biodiversity, comprising a third of the ocean's total biodiversity. Various initiatives such as conservation, restoration, and awareness campaigns have emerged, yet the absence of comprehensive knowledge about their biological response to climate change hampers effective strategies. Corals, symbiotic with Symbiodinium dinoflagellates, rely on this relationship for energy. Stress disrupts this symbiosis, causing coral bleaching, a consequence of Symbiodiniaceae loss. Not all corals react equally; adaptations like symbiont shuffling, altered feeding, and gene expression changes confer resistance. While prior two adaptations are studied, the exploration of gene expression's epigenetic aspects is nascent but promising. Epigenetics shapes phenotypic variation through genotype-environment interactions, responding faster to climate change and potentially carrying transgenerational benefits. DNA methylation is a prominent epigenetic mechanism, impacting gene expression. Corals' microbiome, encompassing bacteria, fungi, viruses, and Symbiodiniaceae, contributes to stress responses and interacts with host epigenetics. Panama offers a unique environment to study change. Its Pacific hosts distinct zones: the Gulf of Chiriquí and Gulf of Panama, the former unaffected by upwelling-driven temperature changes. Two coral species, _Pocillopora meandrina_ and _Pocillopora verrucosa_, inhabit both areas, adapting to different conditions. The project's goals are: contrasting gene expression and microbiomes of _P. meandrina_ and _P. verrucosa_ from both zones (Las Perlas and Coiba); assessing the impact of short-term environmental variations via cross-transplantation; and evaluating adaptation's role in resilience against heat and cold stress. By enhancing our comprehension of coral responses to change, the project aspires to empower reefs to combat the escalating challenges posed by climate change.

## French version 

Les récifs coralliens déclinent rapidement à cause des activités humaines, mettant en danger leur biodiversité majeure, un tiers de celle des océans. Bien que des efforts de conservation et de restauration soient en cours, l'absence de compréhension complète de leur réponse biologique au changement climatique entrave les stratégies efficaces. Les coraux, en symbiose avec les dinoflagellés Symbiodinium, souffrent du stress qui perturbe cette relation vitale, provoquant le blanchissement corallien. Les adaptations, telles que le réarrangement des symbiotes, le changement de mode d'alimentation et les modifications génétiques, confèrent une résistance inégale aux stress. L'épigénétique, notamment la méthylation de l'ADN, joue un rôle crucial en induisant des variations phénotypiques rapides et potentiellement transgénérationnelles. Le microbiome corallien, comprenant bactéries, champignons, virus et Symbiodiniaceae, impacte ces réponses et interagit avec l'épigénétique. Le Panama offre un environnement unique pour étudier ces processus, avec ses deux zones océaniques distinctes. Les coraux _Pocillopora meandrina_ et _Pocillopora verrucosa_ montrent des adaptations différentes dans ces zones. Le projet vise à comparer l'expression génique et les microbiomes de ces coraux dans les deux zones, évaluer les impacts des variations environnementales à court terme via des cross-transplantations, et étudier comment ces adaptations renforcent la résilience aux stress thermiques. Cette recherche pourrait révolutionner la restauration des coraux en améliorant notre compréhension de leurs réponses, et ainsi aider à préserver ces écosystèmes face aux défis grandissants du changement climatique.

## Goals of the research 

The future fate of coral reefs has become increasingly alarming in recent years due to the climate change-driven increase in sea surface temperature [[marangoniSymbiontRegulationStylophora2021]]. Corals are cnidarians that are in obligate symbiosis with dinoflagellates from the genus Symbiodinium (also known as Symbiodiniaceae). This symbiosis is the key to their ecological success. The Symbiodinium provide over 90% of the energy required by the corals, and the corals provide the algae with nutrients and a stable position in the water column [[palmerCnidariaAnthozoansHot2018]], [[davyCellBiologyCnidarianDinoflagellate2012]]. The family of Symbiodiniaceae is divided into nine different genera, ranging from A to I, which can also be further divided into different subclades [[cardenas-alvaradoHigherPopulationGenetic2021]], [[jonesBioticAbioticInfluences]], [[chenDiversitySymbiodiniaceae152019]]. Corals associate with six of them: A, B, C, D, F, and G [[vanoppenBleachingResistanceRole2009]].

However, this symbiosis also has its weaknesses and exposes the organisms to greater sensitivity to environmental stressors, such as the climate change-driven increase in sea surface temperature [[lajeunesseHostSymbiontRecombination2010]], [[marangoniSymbiontRegulationStylophora2021]]. When exposed to such environmental stress, the symbiosis between the two breaks, and the symbionts are expelled from the host, leading to a phenomenon called "coral bleaching" [[davyCellBiologyCnidarianDinoflagellate2012]]. This mechanism of bleaching has been widely linked to the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) from the endosymbionts and the host itself [[marangoniSymbiontRegulationStylophora2021]], [[marty-riveraMitigationCoralBleaching2018]].

This rapid decline in coral cover has led to the start of numerous research projects on corals and on ways to improve their survival in the face of these rapid changes [[rinkevichAugmentingCoralAdaptation2021]].

Previous studies have already shown that corals exposed to thermal stress tend to exhibit greater resilience when subsequent stress occurs, and the mechanisms underlying this occurrence and its dynamics are still broadly unknown [[rinkevichAugmentingCoralAdaptation2021]].

The aim here is to study the dynamics of gene expression and microbiome plasticity in the corals _Pocillopora vercosa_ and _Pocillopora meandrina_ that have been subjected to environmental variations, as well as to assess their resilience to subsequent stress. This objective will be achieved by comparing (1) the DNA methylation of the host, (2) the gene expression of the host, (3) the microbiome associated with the coral, and (4) the energetic stores of the coral (total protein, lipid content, carbohydrate content) following different treatments:

- WP1: Long-term environmental change
- WP2: Short-term environmental change
- WP3: Short-term temperature stress prior to both long and short-term environmental changes

This project will contribute to a better understanding of the genetic processes that induce thermal acclimatization in corals and will hold significant importance for coral conservation.
## State of the art 

Corals, much like plants, are sessile organisms and thus cannot migrate away from a suboptimal environment. This factor forces the organisms to possess a strong adaptation capacity to survive potential changes to their environment [[dixonBimodalSignaturesGermline2014]]. Sensitivity to environmental stress can depend on multiple characteristics such as the symbiodiniaceae they host, the microbiomes, the feeding strategy (heterotrophic or autotrophic), but also differential gene expression [[ritson-williamsCoralCommunityResilience2020]].

High gene expression plasticity has been shown to be correlated with lower susceptibility to bleaching during environmental stress, and corals exposed to environmental variations tend to be more resilient when exposed to subsequent stress [[kenkelGeneExpressionPlasticity2016]] [[barshisGenomicBasisCoral2013]]. Epigenetics is the mechanism that structures phenotypic variation [[rinkevichAugmentingCoralAdaptation2021]]. The flexibility in phenotype may provide a buffer against changes in the environment. However, the wash-in wash-out nature of epigenetics makes it hard to predict its influence on climate change response. The magnitude and duration of these modifications are still widely unknown [[eirin-lopezMarineEnvironmentalEpigenetics2018]].

Epigenetic regulation includes different processes such as DNA methylation, histone modification, or non-coding RNA (ncRNA). DNA methylation is one of the most documented epigenetic regulation processes and has been linked multiple times to environmental plasticity in corals [[eirin-lopezMarineEnvironmentalEpigenetics2018]] [[dixonBimodalSignaturesGermline2014]] [[clevesUnknownKnownAdvancing2020]]. DNA methylation mostly occurs in CpG dinucleotides and is scattered within gene bodies [[dixonBimodalSignaturesGermline2014]]. Depending on the methylation of the gene bodies, the expression of the gene will vary. "House-keeping" genes tend to be more methylated, while functions that are dynamically regulated (such as environmentally driven genes) tend to be less methylated [[dixonBimodalSignaturesGermline2014]]. The high cost of DNA methylation sequencing has slowed down this type of study; however, with the improvement of nanopore technology, it is now easier to obtain DNA methylation data at a lower cost and with great resolution [[clevesUnknownKnownAdvancing2020]] [[liuDetectionDNABase2019]].
DNA methylation is a well-known mechanism when it comes to plasticity-modulating mechanisms [[dixonBimodalSignaturesGermline2014]], and it is also known to change due to changes in environmental conditions [[clevesUnknownKnownAdvancing2020]].

The transcriptome is one of the first lines to be influenced by DNA methylation. Highly methylated genes display reduced transcriptional variability, while low methylated genes tend to be expressed more variably [[clevesUnknownKnownAdvancing2020]]. Corals adapted to environmental variations can also exhibit naturally upregulated genes linked to temperature tolerance even when incubated in normal conditions. Their resilience to stress comes from a prevention mechanism rather than a coping mechanism [[barshisGenomicBasisCoral2013]]. To fully understand the response mechanisms of resilient corals, the transcriptome has to be considered.

However, corals are not the only ones to respond to environmental stress. Besides Symbiodiniaceae, corals also host a multitude of bacteria, fungi, and viruses, together forming the holobiont with the coral. Microbiome dynamics are one of the non-genic mechanisms allowing corals to adapt to their environment. For most corals, microbiome diversity isn't fixed and can vary depending on their environment [[voolstraAdaptingMicrobialHelp2020]]. Its plasticity has been shown to have a great impact on the adaptation capacity [[pradaLinkingPhotoacclimationResponses]]. It is also emerging that epigenetic mechanisms might be closely influenced by microbiome structure and vice versa [[eirin-lopezMarineEnvironmentalEpigenetics2018]]. Considering the impact of the microbiome on the host's epigenetics and its variation due to environmental changes, its identification has to be measured to assess its impact on gene expression.


Coral morphology can be described by many different traits such as growth, branch tickness or form. Most of morphologic traits depend on the coral genotype but can also by influenced by their environment. environmental variation such as change in radiation and waterflow are the most influent when it comes to  coral morphology [[toddMorphologicalPlasticityScleractinian2008a]] However, for a great majority of corals, our understanding on how morphology reflect their environment remain poor. This knowledge gap highlights the need for further investigation into the intricate relationship between coral morphology and environmental factors. While certain aspects of this connection have been explored, there is still much to unravel. Factors beyond radiation and water flow, such as nutrient availability and temperature, may also play crucial roles in shaping coral morphology.

Coral morphology is another pattern known to vary depending on environmental conditions, with light and water flow being the most influential factors [[toddMorphologicalPlasticityScleractinian2008a]]. However, other environmental changes such as temperature and nutrients are still poorly understood in terms of their impact on coral morphology. assesing their 

Panama has very unique features when it comes to ocean environmental change. The Pacific side of Panama is divided into 2 main areas, the non-upwelling Gulf of Chiriqui and the upwelling Gulf of Panama [[dcrozVariabilityUpwellingPacific2007]]. Each year, the Gulf of Panama experiences a seasonal upwelling [[randallUpwellingBuffersClimate2020]]. The upwelling is wind-driven and is influenced by the annual migration of the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ), thus formed by Ekman pumping _(fig)_. Between December and mid-April, the ITCZ migrates south, pushing the waters offshore. However, in the Gulf of Chiriqui, the upwelling has way less effect due to orographic blocking. This upwelling induces significant changes in temperature (up to 10 °C) and salinity over a short period of time. Both reef-building coral species, _Pocillopora meandrina_ and _Pocillopora verucosa_, live in Las Perlas and Coiba, undergoing very distinct environmental conditions.

# Research Project 

The project will be conducted on two species of corals, Pocillopora meandrina and Pocillopora verucosa. The field experiment will take place at the Smithsonian Tropical Institute (STRI) located in NAOS Panama, with Dr. Matthieu Leray as our collaborator. The Pacific coast of Panama possesses an abundant population of Pocillopora verucosa, as well as Pavona clavus in both areas, Las Perlas and Coiba. STRI is also equipped with a mesocosm where pH, temperature, light intensity, and salinity can be monitored. 
  
During each experiment described below, the temperature, water flow intensity, and luminosity will be measured using a TCM-1 Tilt Current Meter.

## WP1 : WP1: Comparison between corals at the upwelling and non upwelling site.
This work package will determine the differences in DNA methylation, transcriptome, microbiome, and energetic storage of the corals _Pocillopora verucosa_ and _Pocillopora meandrina_ from the two sites: Coiba and Las Perlas. To achieve this, 4 colonies from three sites in each zone (Mogomogo, Contadora, and Saboga for Las Perlas, and Granito, Canales, and Machete for Coiba) will be sampled. A triplicate of three fragments per colony will be collected. The colonies have already been tagged and are ready for the sampling period.

Various parameters will be measured to assess the gene expression plasticity of the corals. These include DNA methylation, transcriptome analysis, microbiome composition, and chlorophyll fluorescence 

The DNA methylation [[liuDetectionDNABase2019]] and Transcriptome [[yuNanoporeLongreadRNAseq2021]] will be measured using Oxford Nanopore technology, provided by the University of Brussels. This method has demonstrated good accuracy in methylation measurement [[liuDetectionDNABase2019]]. Additionally, it is more user-friendly and cost-effective compared to traditional methods like Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing (WGBS) [[clevesUnknownKnownAdvancing2020]].

DNA methylation will be measured through Oxford Nanopore technology. To achieve this, corals will be preserved in DNA Shield for sampling, and DNA extraction will be carried out using the phenol/chloroform method. Subsequently, the P2-solo, provided by the University of Brussels, will be employed for sequencing the DNA methylation of the samples. Given that methylation distribution tends to be bimodal in cnidarians [[dixonBimodalSignaturesGermline2014]], it will be straightforward to assess the reliability of the results.

For the transcriptome analysis, Oxford Nanopore technology will also be employed. Coral fragments collected for sampling will be immediately placed in liquid nitrogen. RNA extraction will then be performed using TRIzol reagent, followed by sequencing using a P2-solo nanopore device. The differential expression among the samples will subsequently be analyzed using DESeq2.

The entire microbiome composition will be determined by sequencing specific genetic markers: the nuclear 16S rRNA gene for bacteria and archaea [[waltersImprovedBacterial16S2016]], the ITS2 region of the nuclear ribosomal DNA for the Symbiodiniaceae [[arifAssessingSymbiodiniumDiversity2014]], and the 18S rRNA gene for eukaryotes [[devargasEukaryoticPlanktonDiversity2015]]. Sequences obtained will be assembled into an ITS2 profile for Symbiodiniaceae using the SymPortal framework, and into Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) for bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes.

To identify bacterial families significantly different among samples, the Linear Discriminant Analysis Effect Size (LEfSe) method will be applied. Differences in macrobial communities will be tested using ANOSIM with 9,999 permutations [[zieglerBacterialCommunityDynamics2017]].

Chlorophyll fluorescence will be measured using underwater PAM devices provided by the smythsonian institution. 




## WP2 : Reciprocal transplantations

This work package aims to determine the gene expression plasticity of the corals *Pocillopora verucosa* and *Pocillopora meandrina* from Coiba and Las Perlas through a cross-transplantation between the two sites. This package will investigate the gene expression dynamics of environmentally unacclimatized (coming from Coiba) corals exposed to short-term environmental changes and environmentally acclimatized corals (coming from Las Perlas) exposed to no environmental changes.
  
The cross-transplantation will employ the same colonies utilized in WP1. Six fragments from each colony at every site will be cross-transplanted between Coiba and Las Perlas, as well as vice versa. To facilitate this process, corals gathered from each location will be transported using oxygenated portable tanks to the mesocosm located at the NAOS lab. The corals will undergo a resting period of 2-3 weeks before being transplanted to their new sites. As a "control" measure, six fragments from each colony will also be collected and transplanted back to their original sites. The corals will remain at their new sites for a year, allowing the observation of the impacts of a full upwelling season.

DNA methylation, transcriptome, and microbiome analyses will adhere to the protocol outlined in WP1. Morphology will be assessed using an Artec Space Spider, which is provided by the University of Brussels. Scans will be conducted both before and after a year's time. Changes in morphology, such as growth, thickness, and branch formation, will subsequently be determined using the acquired 3D images.

## WP3 short-stress experiment 

For this work package, corals cross-transplanted between Las Perlas and Coiba will be subjected to a short-term stress experiment to observe their resilience to subsequent stress. A year after coral cross-transplantation, corals will be placed in a mesocosm for acclimatization for 30 days at 28°C. After acclimatation, corals will undergo both cold and hot short-term stress for a week.

In the short-term stress experiment, corals will initially be placed at the normal temperature of 28°C and will undergo a gradual temperature change of 1°C per day until reaching the desired stress temperature. For the heat stress, the temperature will be increased by 1°C each day for 4 days, reaching 32°C, and maintained for 3 days. For the cold stress, the temperature will be gradually reduced by 1°C per day for 4 days to reach 24°C, followed by maintaining the cold stress for 3 days.

Throughout the experiment, corals will be exposed to an average light intensity of 400 PPFD (μmol·m−2·s−1). Temperature and light intensity will be continuously monitored using underwater loggers (Hobo Water Temp Pro). Corals will be placed in the mesocosm by suspending them using nylon strings. The tank will be cleaned daily to prevent algal proliferation.

DNA methylation, transcriptome, and microbiome analyses will follow the protocol outlined in WP1. Each parameter will be measured before and after the temperature stress.

## implication for conservation 

Corals are facing rapid decline in recent decades, primarily due to swift climate change, as they are among the most sensitive animals to environmental fluctuations. Nevertheless, their presence is crucial, as they are the primary architects of coral reefs that host over a third of ocean biodiversity.

Currently, genetic adaptation struggles to keep up with the pace of environmental change. In contrast, epigenetic adaptation serves as a mechanism that promotes rapid phenotypic plasticity, enabling a quicker acclimatization capacity. Such adaptations can endure for decades and, in some species, might even be transgenerational [[rinkevichAugmentingCoralAdaptation2021]]. Understanding the dynamics of these mechanisms holds major importance for advancing coral conservation efforts.

## Workplan 

The work plan for the PhD is described in Table 1. The structure of the project is mainly paced by the upwelling and the non-upwelling seasons, as the fieldwork has to occur depending on this phenomenon. The primary goal of the project is to write three papers. The first paper will focus on the differences in methylation, transcriptome, microbiome, and energetic stores of both coral species in Las Perlas and Coiba. The second paper will explore the dynamics of these same factors after a year of cross-transplantation, and the third will delve into the dynamics of these factors after a short heat stress following a year of environmental change.

## Description of the work environment 

I will be supervised by Prof. Jean-François Flot, who leads the research team of Evolutionary and Ecological Genomics (EEG) in the Evolutionary Biology and Ecology (EBE) research unit at the Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB). His specialties include species delimitation and phylogenetics, mitogenomics, next-generation sequencing, and bioinformatics, all of which will be invaluable to the Ph.D. project. The laboratory equipment available to the EEG research team includes a sterile UV cabinet for DNA manipulation, a Nanodrop spectrophotometer, and a Qubit fluorometer. Several PCR machines are also available, as well as gel electrophoresis equipment contained in a dedicated post-PCR workspace. The laboratory includes a 48-capillary ABI sequencer. Illumina machines are available at the ULB-VUB BrightCore. I will have access to the "Consortium des Équipements de Calcul Intensif" for analyses requiring high computational power.

Ultimately, this PhD will be conducted under the co-supervision of Dr. Matthieu Leray. He is the leader of the Leray Lab at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) in Panama and supervised my year-long internship at STRI during the year 2022-2023. His expertise lies in genomics, coral reef ecology, and genotyping, which will be of major assistance in realizing this Ph.D. The institution also possesses numerous facilities along both coasts of Panama, significantly aiding in the sampling process, including an environmental simulation coral setup, a molecular genetic laboratory with several PCR machines, gel electrophoresis equipment, a sterile UV cabinet for DNA manipulation, a Nanodrop spectrophotometer, and a Qubit fluorometer. An Illumina machine is also available.

reference : 



Leray, Matthieu & Wilkins, Laetitia & Apprill, Amy & Bik, Holly & Clever, Friederike & Connolly, Sean & De León, Marina & Duffy, J. & Ezzat, Leïla & Gignoux-Wolfsohn, Sarah & Herre, Edward & Kaye, Jonathan & Kline, David & Kueneman, Jordan & McCormick, Melissa & McMillan, W. & O'Dea, Aaron & Pereira, Tiago & Petersen, Jillian & Eisen, Jonathan. (2021). Natural experiments and long-term monitoring are critical to understand and predict marine host–microbe ecology and evolution. PLOS Biology. 19. e3001322. 

Wilkins, Laetitia & Leray, Matthieu & O'Dea, Aaron & Yuen, Benedict & Peixoto, Raquel & Pereira, Tiago & Bik, Holly & Coil, David & Duffy, J. & Herre, Edward & Lessios, Harilaos & Lucey, Noelle & Mejía, Luis & Rasher, Douglas & Sharp, Koty & Sogin, Emilia & Thacker, Robert & Vega Thurber, Rebecca & Wcislo, William & Eisen, Jonathan. (2019). Host-associated microbiomes drive structure and function of marine ecosystems. PLOS Biology. 17. e3000533. 

# Additional comment 

During my year-long internship in 2022-2023 at the Smithsonian, a major part of the first work package has already been realized. The colonies have been tagged at each site, and their species have been determined. DNA extraction has already been completed, and the ITS2 profile of the Symbiodiniaceae community has been determined as well. The DNA extracts obtained from each colony will be brought to the University of Brussels in September to initiate the DNA methylation sequencing process.
	
# Figure 
figure 1 : Schematic representation of the workflow that will be followed for this project.

Figure 2 : impact of the Upwelling on the sea surface temperature (SST) and Ekman transport. Adapted from Andrea et al [[corredor-acostaSpatioTemporalVariabilityChlorophyllA2020]]
# Pour Ajouter les références 
make latex reference by replacing what's inside [[]] with ~\cite{insert the text that was inside [[]] here}


Coral reefs face escalating decline due to human activities, jeopardizing their rich biodiversity, comprising a third of the ocean's total biodiversity. Various initiatives such as conservation, restoration, and awareness campaigns have emerged, yet the absence of comprehensive knowledge about their biological response to climate change hampers effective strategies. Corals, symbiotic with Symbiodinium dinoflagellates, rely on this relationship for energy. Stress disrupts this symbiosis, causing coral bleaching, a consequence of Symbiodiniaceae loss. Not all corals react equally; adaptations like symbiont shuffling, altered feeding, and gene expression changes confer resistance. While prior two adaptations are studied, the exploration of gene expression's epigenetic aspects is nascent but promising. Epigenetics shapes phenotypic variation through genotype-environment interactions, responding faster to climate change and potentially carrying transgenerational benefits. DNA methylation is a prominent epigenetic mechanism, impacting gene expression. Corals' microbiome, encompassing bacteria, fungi, viruses, and Symbiodiniaceae, contributes to stress responses and interacts with host epigenetics. Panama offers a unique environment to study change. Its Pacific hosts distinct zones: the Gulf of Chiriquí and Gulf of Panama, the former unaffected by upwelling-driven temperature changes. Two coral species, _Pocillopora meandrina_ and _Pocillopora verrucosa_, inhabit both areas, adapting to different conditions. The project's goals are: contrasting gene expression and microbiomes of _P. meandrina_ and _P. verrucosa_ from both zones (Las Perlas and Coiba); assessing the impact of short-term environmental variations via cross-transplantation; and evaluating adaptation's role in resilience against heat and cold stress. By enhancing our comprehension of coral responses to change, the project aspires to empower reefs to combat the escalating challenges posed by climate change.

Les récifs coralliens déclinent rapidement à cause des activités humaines, mettant en danger leur biodiversité majeure, un tiers de celle des océans. Bien que des efforts de conservation et de restauration soient en cours, l'absence de compréhension complète de leur réponse biologique au changement climatique entrave les stratégies efficaces. Les coraux, en symbiose avec les dinoflagellés Symbiodinium, souffrent du stress qui perturbe cette relation vitale, provoquant le blanchissement corallien. Les adaptations, telles que le réarrangement des symbiotes, le changement de mode d'alimentation et les modifications génétiques, confèrent une résistance inégale aux stress. L'épigénétique, notamment la méthylation de l'ADN, joue un rôle crucial en induisant des variations phénotypiques rapides et potentiellement transgénérationnelles. Le microbiome corallien, comprenant bactéries, champignons, virus et Symbiodiniaceae, impacte ces réponses et interagit avec l'épigénétique. Le Panama offre un environnement unique pour étudier ces processus, avec ses deux zones océaniques distinctes. Les coraux _Pocillopora meandrina_ et  _Pocillopora verrucosa_ montrent des adaptations différentes dans ces zones. Le projet vise à comparer l'expression génique et les microbiomes de ces coraux dans les deux zones, évaluer les impacts des variations environnementales à court terme via des cross-transplantations, et étudier comment ces adaptations renforcent la résilience aux stress thermiques. Cette recherche pourrait révolutionner la restauration des coraux en améliorant notre compréhension de leurs réponses, et ainsi aider à préserver ces écosystèmes face aux défis grandissants du changement climatique.

During a previous project that took place in STRI,  colonies used for this project has been tagged at each site, and their species have been identified. DNA extraction has also been successfully carried out on those colonies. The DNA extracts obtained from each colony will be transported to the University of Brussels in September to initiate the DNA methylation sequencing process and to refine the nanopore protocol and obtain preliminary data.



Coral reefs face an escalating decline due to human activities, jeopardizing their rich biodiversity, which comprises a third of the ocean's total biodiversity. Corals, symbiotic with Symbiodinium dinoflagellates, rely on this relationship for energy. Stress disrupts this symbiosis, causing coral bleaching, a consequence of Symbiodiniaceae loss. Not all corals react equally; Acclimatization mechanisms like symbiont shuffling, altered feeding, and gene expression changes confer resistance. While the first two mechanisms are well studied, the exploration of gene expression's epigenetic aspects is nascent but promising. Epigenetics shapes phenotypic variation through genotype-environment interactions, responding faster to climate change and potentially carrying transgenerational benefits. DNA methylation is a prominent epigenetic mechanism, impacting gene expression. Corals' microbiome, encompassing bacteria, fungi, viruses, and Symbiodiniaceae, contributes to stress responses and interacts with host epigenetics. Acclimatization to changes in environmental conditions makes corals more resilient to future changes. However, the wash-in wash-out mechanism of those acclimatizations remains poorly understood. Panama offers a unique environment to study change. Its Pacific coast comprises two zones: the Gulf of Panama, with strong seasonal upwelling resulting in periodical temperature drops, and the Gulf of Chiriqui, where upwelling does not occur, and temperatures are therefore stable year-long. Two coral species, Pocillopora meandrina and Pocillopora verrucosa, inhabit both areas. The project's objectives are: comparing gene expression and microbiomes of P. meandrina and P. verrucosa from both zones (Las Perlas and Coiba); assessing the impact of short-term environmental variations on both corals via cross-transplantation between the two zones; and evaluating the influence of environmental variation in resilience against future heat and cold stress.


Les récifs coralliens font face à un déclin croissant dû aux activités humaines, mettant en péril leur riche biodiversité. Les coraux, en symbiose avec les dinoflagellés Symbiodinium, dépendent de cette relation pour leur énergie. Le stress perturbe cette symbiose, provoquant le blanchiment des coraux, une conséquence de la perte de Symbiodiniaceae. Tous les coraux ne réagissent pas de la même manière ; des mécanismes d'acclimatation tels que le remaniement des symbiotes, une alimentation modifiée et des changements dans l'expression génétique confèrent une résistance. Alors que les deux premiers mécanismes sont bien étudiés, l'exploration des aspects épigénétiques de l'expression génétique reste peu connu.  La méthylation de l'ADN est un mécanisme épigénétique important, impactant l'expression des gènes. Le microbiome des coraux, englobant des bactéries, des champignons, des virus et des Symbiodiniaceae, contribue aux réponses au stress et interagit avec l'épigénétique de l'hôte. L'acclimatation aux changements des conditions environnementales rend les coraux plus résilients aux changements futurs. Cependant, la dynamique de ces acclimatations reste mal comprise. Le Panama offre un environnement unique pour étudier le changement. Sa côte pacifique comporte deux zones : le golfe de Panama, avec des upwellings saisonniers entraînant des baisses périodiques de température, et le golfe de Chiriqui, où les upwellings n'ont pas lieu, et les températures sont donc stables toute l'année. Deux espèces de coraux, P. meandrina et P. verrucosa, habitent ces deux zones. Les objectifs du projet sont les suivants : comparer l'expression génique et le microbiome de P. meandrina et P. verrucosa des deux zones (Las Perlas et Coiba) ; évaluer l'impact des variations environnementales à court terme sur les deux coraux par transplantation croisée entre les deux zones ; et évaluer l'influence de la variation environnementale sur la résilience face aux futurs stress thermiques et froids